---
layout: post
date:      2010-05-02 17:00
title:   Blogging is a marketing instrument
---

Disclaimer: this post is not intended for the planet. When aggregation of my
blog was set up, there was an agreement that only posts with certain tags
are syndicated. This setting is perhaps no longer operational.

As a speaker at an O'Reilly conference, I got a free book, "Confessions of a
public speaker" by Berkun. Despite the somewhat cheesy title, I found the
book practical and amusing. The book has a lot of hands-on material and is
written in a live, entertaining manner. 

Especially when comparing with a voluminous college book on rhetoric, which
I got myself a few years ago, and since then never touched. Berkun's book is
an easy read, and I worked it off on planes and in Moscow metro.

The matter of good rhetoric deserved an own chapter, called "The art of
making a point". Berkun writes, that the art did not change much since the
ancient Greece, and success is still achieved by three major components:
logic, character and emotion (Logos, Pathos, Ethos). Still, the manner of
public speaking (the emotion), has evolved, and, notes Berkun, got to be
measured right, in proportion to the character of the audience. He compares
a modern lecture on a technical subject with a modern sermon, and notes that
the level of emotion differs.

Similarly, classical marketing materials, created by professional corporate
staff look out of place in the modern world of blogging, where the distance
between hands-on technical people and users/consumers is significantly
shorter.
